So, again, welcome. So good and beautiful to be together, to practice these really essential
teachings. Like I mentioned earlier, I know many of us have been gathering here on Saturdays,
as well as maintaining our own personal practice. So vital to have our own individual practice
and so beautiful, too, when the Sangha can come together and support each other with group
practice, as well as discussion and reflection, and of course, to hear the teachings. So really
special. And then that we can make this time, both in our individual days, as well as a Sangha,
to really come together and do that. So great, so beautiful. It's truly like Rinpoche has
mentioned many times, is actualizing the six paramitas. We all know directly in our own
experience, we all have our ups and downs, busy external stuff, busy internal stuff,
and to actually take the time to let go, allow ourselves to touch home base with the practice.
So beautiful, so precious, that's what we're doing. I think everyone knows that "Nundro"
is what we're focusing on here. "Nundro" is a Tibetan word, means what goes before or
what's the ground, what's the essence, what's the vital essence of our practice. The "Nundro"
practices are embodying all the practices we'll ever do in Tibetan Buddhism, which means
within the whole of Buddhism, there's nothing left out, embodies all the teachings. It's
very pure and simple, and we have this beautiful practice given to us from His Holiness, Dodra
Rinpoche, which is so concise, and so rich. So we have so many practice texts, and so
many commentaries by great, realized living masters, including our own, Kenchenpold and
Shera Rinpoche, Kenpo Sei Londong Yu Rinpoche, also Dodra Rinpoche has many, Dilgo Kiense,
so many great commentaries. Patro Rinpoche really encourage everyone to really study
those and take them to our mind and heart, that's what we're all trying to do and bring
to our practice. So this is primarily practice time, with a little bit of reflection on the
essence according to our capacities. We've been doing this for a few weeks here now,
and we have encouraged people to write in with questions, and many people have, and
we've been busy here, so I'm sorry we haven't necessarily replied, we've answered a few
during our session, so we just thought since we're kind of going into now at least another
month of continuous meeting on Saturday to kind of go over some of the questions that
have come up, and if people have more, you can definitely write. Now where did my little
question sheet go? Uh oh. Where are you? How interesting. Well, we'll see what I can remember,
and maybe it will turn up here somewhere in this. I printed one from Ken, which is a very
nice question, and I'll say a little bit, and of course Lama Drapa is here too, we've
been kind of, because our time is limited, I found it, time to take turns a little bit
each week, but since these are kind of answering some questions, of course, Lama Drapa please,
if there's something to add. Many people wrote in asking about prostrations, so maybe what
we'll do is when we get to that part in the practice, we'll try to have the camera so
people can see the full, but there are a few different ways of doing prostrations. Again,
prostrations are with our body, the expression of our body, and with our speech, and with
our mind, especially Ping, just reflecting on the beautiful qualities, abilities, power
of the three jewels, the three roots, and our joy and devotion towards knowing more
about that. And then with the actual outer expression of prostrations, yes there are
three, there's a few different ways, there's full prostrations and half prostrations. I'm
not going to maybe take the time getting up and moving the camera and stuff now, so when
we get to that part of our practice, we'll try to make sure the camera can see. But the
main thing with prostrations is if you can do the full prostrations, which is how we'll
be doing during the session today, that's the most ideal. And again, according to your
capacities and according to your body's health and everything like that, I think we all can
be honest with ourselves about what those are. So we don't want to push ourselves into
injury, but also we don't want to hold back by just a little bit of just normal discomfort.
So if you can do full prostrations, that's great. If for some reason due to physical
things, then modifying that is fine. If you can't do prostrations at all, in general what
Rinpoche says is to actually make up for that in your accumulations with Vajrasattva practice.
So maybe that's all I'll say for the moment that's addressing those questions. Most of
them are just about how they're done. But yeah, most important is again, our motivation
and to whatever our ability following the lineage instructions to the best we can. Like Kimpo
Sei Wong Rinpoche has said, and it's a very good instruction in regard to our practice,
we don't want to always be sneaking in the side door, but really take the grand entry
into the great stadium of our practice, not just sneaking in the side exit and taking
shortcuts all the time. But again, we have to be real and honest with our practice little
by little. So if anyone has specific questions, please write and ask. I'm just an ordinary
another Sangha member. So if there's questions in modifying your practice, maybe you can
write and ask directly and then we'll check with Rinpoche. And then many people, even though
we've said a few times, have asked about, "Oh, I've heard you need to receive the reading
transmission and empowerment to practice nundra. Can I join the Saturday practices?" So the
answer is, "Yes, please join." And that's coming from Kimpo Sei Wong. Don Yo Rinpoche
is so happy. People are interested in practicing because again, this is such vital essential
practice, truly so beautiful and powerful to really connect our minds and hearts with.
So he strongly encourages. And then of course, the practice lineage is that when we can,
we definitely receive empowerments for practices we do and the reading transmission for practices
we do. And of course, the instructions and apply them. But so when circumstances allow
for people to come here, receive that from Kimpo Rinpoche or once he's able to travel
more from another qualified lineage master, do that. But please don't feel you have to
wait to join the practices. Study, join that. It has Rinpoche's blessings.
And then another question was about repetitions. And once we get to the actual practice of
the nundra we'll do in a little bit, we do repeat. We have these seven sections that
make up the practice and we repeat them as you know. And the questions are, "Oh, is
it a set way?" Meaning we have, of course, this is coming to us in Tibetan. And then
we have English translation. So here we generally do, because we have a little more time, like
three Tibetan, three recitations in Tibetan, three times in English, or even more sometimes,
less, but it's not fixed. If you have time to do Tibetan in English, great. If you have
time to only do English, that's fine. If you can do Tibetan and English, that's nice too.
If you know the Tibetan, you can connect with the meaning. Connecting with the meaning,
reflecting on the meaning and letting all the practice and study we've done land with
our practice as we're reciting is the most important. So again, don't feel you have to
do exactly as we do during these sessions. It can definitely modify. You can do one Tibetan,
two English. However, I think I answered that. With accumulations, definitely. Am I going
to? Accumulations, I think many people know, once we're familiar with the nundra practice,
another really major part of the practice lineage is that we do accumulations of the
nundra, which means we have some goals with how long we're really spending to steep and
dwell and absorb and let be with the practice, with the view, with the meditation, with the
practice. And with that is accumulations. So generally that's 100,000 accumulations
of each section of the nundra. So for example, people have asked, well, what counts as one
and what counts as this and that. So I'll just go through the main sections. So we start
with refuge. So generally when we're doing refuge, that's when we're accumulating our
prostrations. So with each time we do a prostration with the refuge that's counting as one. One
prostration with one recitation is one. And then so we can set a goal for how many we can
do in five minutes or oh, I'm going to do one mala of prostrations with refuge. So that's
it. And then bodhicitta, what we're accumulating is the recitation with that motivation or
bodhicitta vow. So each time we're reciting those lines counts as one and then we each
so one recitation, one, two recitations, two. And then with the mandala offering, each time
we're offering the mandala with the recitation, that's what we're accumulating. Each time we
offer that counts as one, the second time, two, etc. And then ideally when we're doing
our accumulations, that's with the mandala plate. The next section just going through
the nundra is the Vajrasattva. And so what we're accumulating there is 100,000 of the
long Vajrasattva mantra, the 100 syllable Vajrasattva mantra with the meditation, etc.
Connecting with the instructions and the meaning. And then when we get to the guru yoga,
even though like we may recite, we visualize ourselves as "yashe sojal" with Guru Rinpoche
before us and recite that beautiful supplication three times to Guru Rinpoche. Then again,
with all the instructions, visualization, what we're accumulating is the recitation of the
Vajra Guru mantra, "O Mahon Vajra Guru Pema Siddhi Hom." So that's the real heart of that
accumulation practice is reciting the Vajra Guru mantra. So one Vajra Guru mantra counts as one,
and if you go 108 is one mala, and then you set your goal with that and keep track.
So those are the five sections we're accumulating with that.
And then this is the question I thought was really interesting. I mean,
they're all interesting, but this has a lot of juiciness to it.
Accumulation of merit section ends with complete two accumulations. So I think this is referring
to the mandala, the body's enjoyments, possessions and glories of the succession of all my lif
etimes
I offer to the three jewels in order to complete the two accumulations. And then Ken is saying,
"I believe that accumulations here refers to skillful means and wisdom which develop along
with each other." That's true. And then just asking a little bit more about skillful means.
So yeah, I think one part there, because I think it came up in another conversation,
I actually overheard here, but just, yes, we are in our practice, the whole path is accumulating.
The two accumulations is referring to accumulation of merit, accumulation of wisdom,
and accumulation of merit can be understood too as accumulation of skillful means.
And I'll get to that. But I think the important thing that I think Ken brought up here is that
we're not waiting to develop our wisdom until we develop our skillful means, or accumulate our
merit, or vice versa. They're really, like they say in the lineage, like two bird wings. We're
accumulating our merit as we're accumulating our wisdom. They support each other. And here,
accumulation of merit is really referring to positive karma is one way. Using our conceptual
mind to, again, do what? Refrain from harm. Engage in what's benefiting, nurturing, centering
ourselves and others. Kind of knowing, becoming more and more attuned to what's helpful and what's
harmful within the different contexts and experiences we come upon in life. And engaging with
things that are positive, which means that it's based on a positive outlook.
You know, one based on, again, our joy, appreciation, our trust, and our goodness qualities,
and those of others. Based in our bodhicitta, and our purity, motivation, and devotion.
That's skillful means. And then is accumulation of merit. And then we have the skillful means,
the more and more we're attuned to the truth of cause and effect, and of interdependence.
The more, especially the more our wisdom is shining and unimpeded, then the more,
like in examples of Guru Patma Sambhaava, Buddha Shakyamuni, Yeshe Sojal, these great,
realized, enlightened ones, then that's true, the perfection of discipline, really,
the paramita of discipline. Because it's being very attuned to what's going to be most
beneficial for as many, all the various ways of seeing and perceiving
for the benefit of others. And then we have, we've been given through these great wisdom practices,
these practices, which are skillful means, the Vajrayana is especially known as it's the skillful
means infused with bodhicitta and joy, devotion, contentment, that really is so catalyzing and
activating. It can really purify very quickly and bring out a lot of good qualities in an
accelerated manner. It's very powerful, these practices we're doing,
like the mandala offering itself in the example. It's really connecting with that generosity,
motivation, but then through the wisdom of our great teachers, Buddha Shakyamuni,
Guru Padmasambhava, this is like using, it seems so simple, but putting all these
ingredients together is creating these great karmic ripples and reverberations that helps
to bring more and more positive circumstances to feed our positive cause, to purify more,
remove our obscurations more, bring out our bodhicitta and our Buddha nature more
and more beautifully. So I think I'm kind of running out of a little time because our main
point is to practice. So those are just a few thoughts with those questions. Sorry, my mind
solved the time and so I kind of clamped down a little bit there at the end of that,
but I completed my thought, I believe. Can I mention some real quick? Yes, please. So skillful
means in general, there's different ways to unpack it, but in one way it's holding our mind
in place. So we're intentionally kind of like making our mind and our hearts stay put in a way.
And what's skillful about it is it helps us connect to our Buddha nature. It helps us connect to
the
Buddha nature and others. It helps us bring out bodhicitta, joy, devotion, compassion, gratitude.
That's what's skillful. So what ways do we hold ourselves? Do we support ourselves? Sometimes do
we limit ourselves so that we can more directly, more thoroughly, more just full on connect to this
goodness within ourselves and the goodness around us and the goodness in others. So it's skillful
if it helps us do that. So having accumulation, we're putting ourselves in a container of doing
100,000 of each of these five sets. We're holding ourselves in this pattern so that we can connect
to these goodness qualities in ourselves and others. And it's good. It's a practical thing
that also what's skillful is to some degree that putting ourselves in the corner,
right, where we can't just go do what we want. We're going to sit down for an hour or two hours.
We're going to recite it in such and such way. And we're going to follow the linear sequence. And
there's an order that we're holding ourselves to. That part of our egoic response to just want to
break free and do what I want and my way and I don't want to do this and I have other things to do
and I'm so busy. Expect that. Because that's the habit energy we have of trying to avoid actually
doing what we know is good for us and connecting to our goodness and trusting that goodness in
ourselves. Our egoic tendency is going to want to say no. This feels too hard. This feels too
confusing. I'm falling asleep. I'm too bored. We'll fill in a kind of some example of why
this isn't okay. And that's also skillful because we need to see how our mind and our heart shuts
down and avoids trying to open up. We have to become conscious of that. That's a big part of
the path of seeing how we keep avoiding doing what we know is really critically important
for our own freedom, for our own happiness, so we can be more of benefit to others. We have to see
how we keep not doing that with a kind, you know, with kindness, personal kindness. But that's also
skillful if we feel like oh I have another reason I'm not going to do my nundra today. It's a skill
ful
means of the nundra, helping us see that. It's also a skillful means of the nundra of connecting
to that goodness, that diligence, these paramitas, and actually sitting down and doing it. So it's
good and one way it holds us within our bodhicitta and it also shows us how we keep refusing to be
in our bodhicitta. So it has this kind of dual effect and that wisdom of seeing where we're
stopping ourselves, that's wisdom. And also that wisdom of seeing where we're really fully taking
on the beautiful responsibility of our nature, like fully shining out, that's also wisdom.
Oh and I just remember too, I'll just say quickly, along the lines of talking about
when we are doing our accumulations in nundra, someone had asked about, you know, if during the
day you have some extra time to work on your accumulations and that's wonderful. And what
Rinpoche's have instructed with that is definitely if we have the goal of going through the full
nundra practice at least once in a day or whatever you're setting as your goal, let's assume it's
once a day. And then you go through from beginning to end of the practice text,
dedicate the merit, and somewhere in there you've spent more time with the section you're
accumulating. And then you continue, dedicate the merit, and move into the day, hopefully keeping
the atmosphere of the practice and the view with your conduct. And then if you have time in the day
for a little more formal session, you can go right to the section you're accumulating. But with
that
too you want to keep in mind the three frames. So begin with joy, appreciation, bodhicitta,
purity view, devotion, maybe recite the seven line prayer at least. And then if you have time,
lineage prayer. And then you can go with the spirit of refuge and bodhicitta. And then you
can go to the section you're accumulating and then meditate a little and then dedicate the merit.
So keep those three frames. But again, so that's if you are accumulating, you can do that.
Okay, so maybe we'll, we will, not maybe, we'll start our main practice now of doing the nundra.